                                        Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with
                                        Small Language Models
                                        EVAN KING, University of Texas at Austin, USA
                                        HAOXIANG YU, University of Texas at Austin, USA
                                        SAHIL VARTAK, University of Texas at Austin, USA
                                        JENNA JACOB, University of Texas at Austin, USA
                                        SANGSU LEE, University of Texas at Austin, USA
arXiv:2405.03821v1 [cs.HC] 6 May 2024




                                        CHRISTINE JULIEN, University of Texas at Austin, USA
                                        Everyday devices like light bulbs and kitchen appliances are now embedded with so many features and automated behaviors
                                        that they have become complicated to actually use. While such “smart” capabilities can better support users’ goals, the task of
                                        learning the “ins and outs” of different devices is daunting. Voice assistants aim to solve this problem by providing a natural
                                        language interface to devices, yet such assistants cannot understand loosely-constrained commands, they lack the ability to
                                        reason about and explain devices’ behaviors to users, and they rely on connectivity to intrusive cloud infrastructure. Toward
                                        addressing these issues, we propose thoughtful things: devices that leverage lightweight, on-device language models to take
                                        actions and explain their behaviors in response to unconstrained user commands. We propose an end-to-end framework that
                                        leverages formal modeling, automated training data synthesis, and generative language models to create devices that are both
                                        capable and thoughtful in the presence of unconstrained user goals and inquiries. Our framework requires no labeled data
                                        and can be deployed on-device, with no cloud dependency. We implement two thoughtful things (a lamp and a thermostat)
                                        and deploy them on real hardware, evaluating their practical performance.
                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: natural language interfaces, generative language models, self-explaining systems, smart
                                        devices, human-centered computing
                                        ACM Reference Format:
                                        Evan King, Haoxiang Yu, Sahil Vartak, Jenna Jacob, Sangsu Lee, and Christine Julien. 2024. Thoughtful Things: Building
                                        Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models. 1, 1 (May 2024), 24 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

                                        1    INTRODUCTION
                                        Miniaturization of hardware, coupled with ubiquitous connectivity and increasingly powerful software imple-
                                        mentations have produced a dramatic boost in the capability—and complexity—of everyday devices. Ovens can
                                        now subtly adapt cooking modes to different recipes [38], while thermostats can utilize long-term sensing to learn
                                        energy-efficient schedules based on user habits [21]. Even light bulbs have evolved from simple “on-off” devices
                                        to include the ability to adapt to a user’s circadian rhythms [35]. This complexity is further compounded in
                                        high-end “prosumer” devices, which tend to incorporate even deeper sets of features—from musical synthesizers
                                        Authors’ addresses: Evan King, e.king@utexas.edu, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA; Haoxiang Yu, hxyu@utexas.edu,
                                        University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA; Sahil Vartak, sv25972@utexas.edu, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA;
                                        Jenna Jacob, jenna.jacob@utexas.edu, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA; Sangsu Lee, sethlee@utexas.edu, University of Texas
                                        at Austin, Austin, TX, USA; Christine Julien, c.julien@utexas.edu, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.

                                        Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
                                        copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
                                        page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
                                        otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
                                        permissions@acm.org.
                                        © 2024 Association for Computing Machinery.
                                        XXXX-XXXX/2024/5-ART $15.00
                                        https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX


                                                                                                                                    , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
2   • E. King, et al.


    Change to a dim, warm glow.                                        How bright is that?




                                                   “state”: “on”,
                                                   “brightness”: 50,
                                                   “color”: {
                                                                                                       The light is
                                                     “r”: 128,
                                                     “g”: 0,                                           moderately dim
                                                     “b”: 0                                            with a warm
                                                   }                                                   reddish color.



Fig. 1. Our prototype implementation of a “thoughtful lamp”. The lamp leverages a fine-tuned small language model running
on a Raspberry Pi to respond to loosely constrained user commands with appropriate actions (e.g., changing color; left to
right) and explanations (e.g., describing its state and capabilities; right)


with nearly-infinite combinations of parameters [53] to exercise bikes that adapt workout routines to different
fitness levels [6]. However, for all but the most technically literate “power users”, these smart devices can be
intimidating [25, 28]—if only because their capabilities are not easily understood, and the reasoning behind their
behaviors is often unclear [63]. In understanding the capabilities and behaviors of their devices, users face a
steeper learning curve than ever: the user manual for a “smart” General Electric refrigerator, for instance, is twice
as long as its “non-smart” counterpart [2, 3]. Modern devices are empowered to do more than ever and, as a
result, are more complicated than ever to actually use.
   Natural language interfaces (NLI) are a popular way for users to control smart devices. The most widely-adopted
NLI are “smart home assistants” like Alexa or Google Home, which can interpret simple voice commands to
control devices connected to a user’s home network. In practice, home assistants have numerous issues; among
them, they impose burdensome, rigid command structures that make them frustrating to use [42, 58] and rely on
constant connectivity to the cloud. With cloud dependency comes a host of other concerns: high business cost [13],
weak user privacy [5, 54], and unpredictable “bricking” of users’ devices when services are sunset [4, 12, 44].
While the recent introduction of large language models (LLMs) for device control provides added flexibility [30],
these approaches rely on GPU-hungry LLMs that demand either powerful hardware [45] or impose the same
cloud dependency as existing smart home assistants [31]. Furthermore, recent LLM-based smart home systems
cannot explain the reasoning behind devices’ behaviors—they can act, but they cannot think.
   In this paper, our objective is to build smart devices that are not only capable, but also thoughtful. This
“thoughtfulness” refers to individual devices that possess some degree of self-knowledge that allows them to
flexibly reason about their internal settings and states in relation to users’ inquiries and goals. A user might ask a
thoughtful lamp, for instance, to “make it more welcoming in here”, and the lamp can reason about “welcoming”
in relation to its available settings to meet the user’s goal in a flexible manner. A thoughtful thermostat might
leverage its self-knowledge to explain to a confused user who asks “why did the heat turn off?” when the
thermostat executes an otherwise-opaque learned schedule. In realizing a thoughtful thing, we synergize a feature-
rich device’s ability to take actions and provide helpful explanations in response to loosely-constrained user
commands. We accomplish this with no dependence on the cloud or on GPU-rich local hardware, which improves
device longevity and benefits user privacy. Consequently, these devices are more human-centric because user
interactions are tailored to the goals, communication styles, and privacy concerns of users.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                    Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models •         3


   The key insight of our work is that we only need to define a state model for a device, after which we can
automate the task of training a small language model to reason about the device in the manner of a “thoughtful
thing”. We develop this concept in several steps. First, we establish a definition of “thoughtful things”, along
with some simplifying assumptions. We then introduce a general-purpose framework for building thoughtful
things. Our five-step approach allows us to build thoughtful things by training a grounded, lightweight model
of self-knowledge using a combination of formal modeling, automated training data synthesis, and small (i.e.,
sub-3B-parameter), fine-tuned language models. This self-knowledge empowers a thoughtful thing to reason
about its internal settings and states in relation to unconstrained natural language commands given by users
without a need for cloud connectivity or expensive hardware, and requires no labeled data collection to train.
To demonstrate our framework, we undertake two case study implementations of thoughtful things—a lamp
and a thermostat. We deploy both implementations on a realistic consumer device (Raspberry Pi) and show the
effectiveness of our framework for building devices that provide high-quality, human-centric user interactions.
   Our key contributions are as follows:
      • A practical framework for building thoughtful things: devices that leverage small, fine-tuned language
        models to reason about their own behaviors and capabilities to respond to unstructured user commands with
        appropriate actions or explanations. Our framework requires no labeled training data and leverages models
        small enough to run on-device, removing the need for costly, intrusive, and ephemeral cloud infrastructure.
      • A set of evaluations that demonstrate the practical performance of models produced by our framework.
      • Two implementations of thoughtful things—a thoughtful lamp and a thoughtful thermostat—which we
        integrate on readily available consumer hardware (Raspberry Pi 5). We collect empirical measurements of
        on-device performance (e.g., response latency), which hint at feasibility for practical applications.
  The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 situates the paper with related work, definitions, and simplifying
assumptions. Section 3 introduces our framework for building thoughtful things. Section 4 describes our real-world
implementations of two thoughtful things using our framework: a thoughtful lamp and thoughtful thermostat.
Section 5 evaluates the quality and runtime performance of the models produced by our framework, while
Section 6 discusses limitations and avenues for future work. Section 7 concludes.

2     BACKGROUND
We first discuss related work in empirical studies, self-explaining systems, natural language interfaces, and large
language models. We then establish a set of definitions and assumptions that situate the remainder of the paper.

2.1    Related Work
Prior empirical studies motivate our effort to improve smart device usability and understandability. Lazar et
al. found that smart device users “may not have the expertise of how devices could suit their goals” and that
“extra work...was a significant issue” that leads to abandonment of smart devices [37]. He et al. noted that smart
device users often believe “one had to be an expert to write rules” to make full use of one’s devices, and that
“inexperienced users were intimidated”. They also found that the opaque automated behaviors of, e.g., smart
thermostats, are a common cause of frustration, concluding that “it is necessary to give users greater transparency”
about devices’ behaviors [25]. The importance of transparency is echoed in studies by Coskun et al. and Yang et
al. [15, 63]. In a study among older adults, Iancu and Iancu found that while users “like owning smart devices,
they consider them too complex and intrusive”, and concluded that users “require substantial help in using,
understanding and discovering new functions of...device[s]” [28]. Privacy is particularly important, as user fears
about cloud-connected devices that are “always listening” are known to reduce adoption [22]. User studies signal
a need for smart devices that are usable, understandable, and unintrusive in spite of their complexity [39].

                                                                             , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
4 •    E. King, et al.


    Self-explaining systems that can describe their capabilities and reasoning are proposed to improve user trust
and understanding [17, 34]. In smart environments, prior work achieves self-explanation by composing formal
descriptions of device capabilities and/or automation rules to provide instructions and descriptions to users.
Lieberman et al. proposed Roadie, a framework for generating device instructions by leveraging a knowledge
graph of user goals, a set of device actions, and a partial-order planner [40]. Burmeister et al. subsequently
proposed a “Smart Object Description Language” for formalizing the capabilities of smart devices [10, 11], which
Kordts et al. integrated in a framework that synthesizes user documentation for ensembles of smart devices [33].
Coppers et al. and Sadeghi et al. similarly leverage formal treatments for self-explanation, but focus on user-
centric explanations of automation routines at different levels of specificity [14, 52]. As in prior work, our
framework leverages formal descriptions of devices—albeit to a different end. We leverage formalization as a
sort of grounding for training and reasoning with a generative language model. This allows us to incorporate
out-of-domain knowledge—e.g., information about the how device settings relate to abstract concepts like mood,
or human contexts—that tends to be absent from formal specifications.
    Natural language interfaces (NLI) that enable users to interact with devices via spoken commands are
popular due to their purported accessibility and ease-of-use [47, 49]. Yates et al. proposed an early NLI for
appliances that leverages a behavioral model and relational database to allow users to query or modify device
state with structured commands, e.g., to ask an answering machine “how many messages?” or to “delete old
messages” [64]. A variety of works have proposed NLI to other devices, e.g., fridges [19, 22], automobiles [57], and
sound synthesizers [8, 43]. Research in NLI has predominantly focused on methods for intent detection and slot
filling, through which a system extracts key intents and entities from user utterances to map to hard-coded system
actions [61]. “Smart home assistants” like Google Home and Alexa are arguably the dominant form of NLI for
smart device control in practice. These assistants tend to suffer from an inability to understand loosely-constrained
commands, which contributes to high user friction and dissatisfaction while limiting accessibility [16, 42, 46].
    Large language models (LLMs) have recently gained traction due to their high performance at many
downstream natural language tasks. LLM research stems from the introduction of the transformer architecture
by Vaswani et al., which leverages “attention” to model inter-sequence dependencies in language [59]. When
trained on significant amounts of unconstrained text, these models can generalize to a variety of tasks involving
language, including code synthesis [62] and reasoning [32]. These models also exhibit good performance at smart
home control, as they are able to model the relationship between unconstrained natural language and device
settings and/or state encoded in, e.g., JSON (see Fig. 2). King et al. introduced the use of LLMs for controlling
ensembles of smart devices with Sasha, a system that leverages general-purpose LLMs (i.e., GPT-4 [1] and Llama
2 [56]) to generate “action plans” in response to unconstrained user commands [31]. Paul et al. proposed a
method for synthesizing data and fine-tuning smaller language models (i.e., Llama 2) to specialize at smart device
control [45]. As with prior work, we leverage language models for device control, but introduce several important
novelties. First, our work leverages local models that are less than half the size of the state of the art for smart
spaces—the 2.7B Phi-2 [23] and the 2B Gemma [55] base models—which greatly reduces the cost of training and
implementation in real devices. Second, our approach differs in that we train models to reason about the state of
individual devices, rather than ensembles. Finally, our work is the first to introduce the use of small language
models for smart device explainability, which has not been explored in the literature.

2.2    Definitions & Assumptions
Our goal is to build everyday devices that can respond to a given unconstrained user command with either an
appropriate action 𝛼 or logically correct explanation 𝜖 (Fig. 3). A device acts by transitioning to a valid and
appropriate state, i.e., by choosing settings that satisfy the user’s request. An action 𝛼 is therefore an actionable (i.e.,
machine-parseable) description of the state that a device should take in response to a command. A device explains

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                              Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models •                   5


                               “it’s too dark in here”                           “it’s way too cold”             55F



                              {”                             {”                {”                                  {”
                          state                              state           tem                                   tem
                              “:                             “:         perature                                   perature
                                ”                            ”                 “:                                  “:
                            off                              off               55                                  55
                              “}                             “}                  }                                 }
                                it                           it                  it                                it
                               ‘s                            ‘s                 ‘s                                 ‘s
                             too                             too             way                                   way
                            dark                             dark             too                                  too
                               in                            in              cold                                  cold
                            here                             here


Fig. 2. Visualizations of attention in a transformer model (Phi-2) given input user commands and device states. Generalist
base models are pre-trained on large amounts of code and unconstrained text, so they learn semantic relationships between
commands and relevant machine-readable state (e.g., “dark” and “off”). In this paper, we fine-tune these models to generate
responses with device-specific actions and explanations that adhere to a real device’s state model.


                   User Command                                                 Device                                         Response
                                     cα   Action-Oriented                                                               α          Action
                                                                           Generative Model
                                                                                                                        {
             well-specified          set to 50% brightness                      (LLM)                                       “state”: “on”,
moderately underspecified            make it dimmer                                                                         ”brightness”: 50
      fully underspecified           it’s too bright                                                                    }




                                     cє Explanation-Oriented                   State Model                              є       Explanation
                                     what is the brightness?                                                           “The lamp is currently on
                                                                                      “on”: {

                                                               ?                      }
                                                                                        ”brightness”: (0, 100)



                                     how bright is that?                                                               and set to a medium
                                     why is it so bright?                                                              brightness.”
                                                                                      “off”: {

                                                                                      }




Fig. 3. Thoughtful things are devices that respond to unconstrained user commands with appropriate actions (i.e., state
changes) or explanations (i.e., descriptions of current state and capabilities). We accomplish this by combining a small,
fine-tuned generative language model with a formal system model. The LLM flexibly synthesizes new states and explanations
in response to diverse user commands, while the system model grounds responses in a device’s true capabilities.


by generating a natural language description of its current state, with sensitivity to the device’s capabilities.
Taking the example of a “thoughtful lamp”, the device should respond to an action-oriented command 𝑐 𝛼 like
“make the light better for reading” by generating an action 𝛼 that assigns, e.g., a brightness and color that a user
would find appropriate for reading. If the user issues an explanation-oriented command 𝑐𝜖 like “is this as
bright as it gets?”, the lamp should reason about its capabilities in relation to its current state to produce an
explanation 𝜖, e.g., “No, the light is at half brightness, so it can be brighter.”
   Natural language commands have varying levels of specificity. We adapt a definition of command specificity
from related work [31]. We target three levels:
    • Well-specified commands describe specific, desired actions/explanations and relevant settings, e.g., “set
      to 50% brightness” or “what is the current brightness level?”

                                                                                                 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
6   • E. King, et al.


      State Modeling                  Random State Generation           Knowledge Synthesis                          Bootstrapping                 Distillation
    Formalize the device’s               Randomly generate a             Create actions/explanations           Fine-tune a base model on      Generate new queries &
states and associated settings        diverse set of possible states      that yield/describe states           synthetic knowledge & state   correct output with teacher


                                                                                                                 Make the light
                                                                                                               bright and spooky

    on                      off                                                                               “state”: “on”,
                                                                                                              “brightness”: 100,
                                                                                                              “color”: { ... }

                                                                                                                I’m on and my
“state”: “on”,       “state”: “off”                                         ACTION         EXPLANATION          color is purple
“brightness”: ...,                                                      Make the light     I’m on and my
“color”: { ... }                                                       bright and spooky   color is purple.




Fig. 4. Overview of our framework. Our five-step process leverages a combination of formal modeling, training data synthesis,
and fine-tuning and distillation of large language models to train a lightweight model capable of generating appropriate
settings and explanations for individual smart devices in response to unconstrained user commands.



     • Moderately underspecified commands allude to desired actions/explanations and relevant settings, but
       do not name them specifically, e.g., “make it dimmer” or “how bright is that?”
     • Fully underspecified commands make no reference to device settings or values, but still have an implicit
       goal, e.g., “it’s too bright” or “why is it so bright?”.
   We assume the ability to infer whether a command is action- or explanation-oriented is a given, i.e., we assume
a device can infer whether a command 𝑐 is either 𝑐 𝛼 or 𝑐𝜖 . Furthermore, we leave user commands with no action-
or explanation-oriented goal out of scope, i.e., conversational commands like “hey lamp, how’s it going today?”
have no specified response.
   We assume that the device state that is acted upon or explained by a thoughtful thing is finite, and that a
formal state model for the device is tractable. This applies to a variety of everyday devices, e.g., lights, thermostats,
household appliances, televisions, etc., but does not apply to more complex continuous or real-time “systems of
systems” like whole automobiles, robots, etc. Furthermore, we do not capture the temporal relationship between
subsequent states: the thoughtful lamp cannot respond to explanation-oriented commands like “what color were
you yesterday?” We describe our approach to state modeling in more detail in Section 3.1.

3    A FRAMEWORK FOR BUILDING THOUGHTFUL THINGS
This section introduces our general-purpose framework for building thoughtful things. We leverage a combination
of formal modeling of a device, along with generative modeling of appropriate actions and explanations (provided
by a small generative language model). The former provides a grounded definition of the device’s capabilities,
while the latter provides the flexibility to respond to diverse user commands. The key advantage of our framework
is that the engineering effort is limited to designing a device’s system model—we fully automate the process of
fine-tuning a complementary generative model to reason about a given device’s state in response to action- and
explanation-oriented user commands. The framework, depicted in Fig. 4, is summarized as follows:
    (1) State Modeling. We first design a formal state model that captures a device’s high-level states, as well as
        the lower-level settings and sensor values that are associated with each state.
    (2) Random State Generation. Given a state model of a device, we randomly generate a large set of valid,
        pseudo-random snapshots of different states to serve as unlabeled training data.
    (3) Knowledge Synthesis. For each generated device state snapshot, we use an instruction-tuned teacher
        LLM to synthesize both an action-oriented command that would result in the device reaching that state, as
        well as an explanation-oriented command and corresponding explanation that describes that snapshot.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                     Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models •         7


             Name                               Description
      𝛼      action                             machine-parseable description of the settings that a device
                                                should have in response to a user command
      𝜖      explanation                        NL description of a device’s current state or capabilities
      𝑐𝛼     action-oriented command            NL command that triggers a device to generate an 𝛼
      𝑐𝜖     explanation-oriented command       NL command that triggers a device to generate an 𝜖
      𝑚      high-level state name              names a high-level device mode or state, e.g., “on” state of a light
                                                or “cool” state of a thermostat
      𝜎𝑖     valid range for setting 𝑖          defines the range of possible values for a setting 𝑖
      Σ      set of valid setting ranges        set of all 𝜎𝑖 for a device
      𝛾𝑗     valid range for sensor input 𝑗     defines the range of possible values for a sensor input 𝑗
      Γ      set of valid sensor input ranges   set of all 𝛾 𝑗 for a device
      𝑡𝑚     template for state 𝑚               specifies the (𝑖, 𝜎𝑖 ) and ( 𝑗, 𝛾𝑖 ) that are relevant to the state 𝑚
      𝑠𝑚     snapshot of state 𝑚                describes the current value 𝑣𝑖 of each setting and value 𝑣 𝑗 of
                                                each sensor for a device in state 𝑚 at runtime
Table 1. Summary of notation we use to formalize the state model of a device. Devices generate either an action 𝛼 or
explanation 𝜖 in response to a user command 𝑐 of the corresponding type. For each state 𝑚, a corresponding template 𝑡𝑚
describes the capabilities of the device in that state. Specifying 𝑡𝑚 provides (1) means to easily generate synthetic data
for fine-tuning a language model on a given device’s state and (2) a basis for grounding a language model’s actions and
explanations in the real capabilities of the device.



 (4) Model Bootstrapping. Using the initial set of synthesized snapshots and annotations, we fine-tune a small
     (sub-3B-parameter) language model to generate actions and explanations in response to user commands.
 (5) Model Distillation. Finally, we refine the initial fine-tuned model by initiating a feedback loop between
     the bootstrapped “student” model and a larger “teacher” model that is capable of identifying and remedying
     inaccuracies in the smaller model’s responses.
 We describe each of these steps in detail in the following. To aid explanation, we alternate between two
motivating examples—a “thoughtful lamp” and “thoughtful thermostat”—that we later implement in Section 4.

3.1       State Modeling
The notation introduced in this section (and used throughout the remainder of the paper) is summarized in
Table 1. Fig. 5 provides a helpful visual summary of the state model.
   We model a device on two complementary levels of abstraction: (1) a high-level state machine 𝑆 that expresses
the valid transitions between coarse-grained states or “modes” 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 of a device, and (2) a set 𝑇 of lower-level
templates 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 associated with each state 𝑚. The first step in designing a state model for a device is to identify
each of the 𝑚 that belong to the set of coarse-grained device states 𝑆. Then, for each 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 we must design a
corresponding 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 . A thermostat, for instance, has four high-level states 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 = {fan, heat, cool, off }, and
thus four templates 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 = {𝑡 fan, 𝑡 heat , 𝑡 cool , 𝑡 off }.
   The purpose of a template 𝑡𝑚 is to specify the valid ranges for settings and, optionally, sensor inputs that are
relevant to the state 𝑚. We refer to the “name” of a setting as 𝑖 and a sensor input as 𝑗. We distinguish between
settings and sensors in this manner because it allows us to later enforce the fields of a device’s state that an
underlying generative model is or is not permitted to change. In general, a device has a set Σ of individual settings
𝜎𝑖 ∈ Σ and a set Γ of individual sensor inputs 𝛾 𝑗 ∈ Γ. Both 𝜎𝑖 and 𝛾 𝑗 define valid ranges for a corresponding
setting or sensor input with the name 𝑖 or 𝑗, e.g., a lamp’s percent brightness setting 𝜎brightness = [1, 100].

                                                                              , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
8   • E. King, et al.


For, e.g., a thermostat, the device’s full set of possible settings is Σthermostat = {𝜎setpoint } and sensor values is
Γthermostat = {𝛾 room_temperature }. The lamp has settings Σlamp = {𝜎brightness , 𝜎r , 𝜎g , 𝜎b } and no sensors, i.e., Γlamp = ∅.
   Each template 𝑡𝑚 contains a subset of the 𝜎𝑖 ∈ Σ and the 𝛾 𝑗 ∈ Γ, depending on whether the setting or sensor
input is relevant to the state 𝑚. A 𝜎𝑖 is relevant to 𝑚 if 𝜎𝑖 influences the behavior of the device in that state. A
𝛾𝑖 is relevant to 𝑚 if (1) 𝛾𝑖 influences the behavior of the device in that state, or (2) 𝛾𝑖 influences the choice of
an action 𝛼 that would result in the device transitioning to a different state 𝑚 ′ that is accessible from 𝑚. We
illustrate relevance with a concrete example. The 𝜎setpoint of a thermostat is relevant to only a subset of states,
i.e., when the thermostat is set to either 𝑚 = heat or 𝑚 = cool. In the fan and off modes, 𝜎setpoint is not relevant
since the setpoint does not influence the operation of the thermostat in those modes. 𝜎setpoint therefore appears
only in 𝑡 heat and 𝑡 cool . The thermostat also has a sensor input 𝛾 room_temperature in order to regulate the operation
of the system. This sensor input is relevant to every state 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆, and thus appears in every template 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 .
This is because the thermostat needs awareness of the temperature (even when, e.g., in the off state) in order
to choose appropriate future states (i.e., take an action 𝛼) in response to user commands. For example, if the
thermostat is 𝑚 = off and the user gives the command 𝑐 𝛼 = “it’s too hot in here”, the thermostat needs awareness
of the room temperature in order to choose an appropriate setpoint as it transitions to the 𝑚 ′ = cool state. In an
implementation, 𝑡𝑚 takes the form of an associative array (e.g., a Python dictionary), where each relevant setting
name 𝑖 or sensor name 𝑗 is a key of 𝑡𝑚 and the corresponding 𝜎𝑖 and 𝛾𝑖 is a value:

                        𝑡𝑚 = {(𝑖, 𝜎𝑖 ) | 𝜎𝑖 ∈ Σ, 𝜎𝑖 is relevant to 𝑚} ∪ {( 𝑗, 𝛾 𝑗 ) | 𝛾 𝑗 ∈ Γ, 𝛾 𝑗 is relevant to 𝑚}
   At runtime, a device’s current state is described by a snapshot 𝑠𝑚 , which is an instantiated template that
contains each setting 𝑖 and sensor input 𝑗 from the keys of the corresponding template 𝑡𝑚 , with values 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑗
assigned. Additionally, every 𝑠𝑚 contains a default “state” element that names the high-level state it is associated
with, i.e., ∀𝑠𝑚 , (“state”, 𝑚) ∈ 𝑠𝑚 . A snapshot 𝑠𝑚 is, like 𝑡𝑚 , an associative array. A state snapshot is only valid if all
𝑖 and 𝑗 in 𝑠𝑚 exist in the corresponding 𝑡𝑚 , and their values are within the ranges specified by 𝜎𝑖 and 𝛾 𝑗 :

               𝑠𝑚 = {(𝑖, 𝑣𝑖 ) | ∀𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ 𝑡𝑚 ∧ 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝜎𝑖 } ∪ {( 𝑗, 𝑣 𝑗 ) | ∀𝑗, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑡𝑚 ∧ 𝑣 𝑗 ∈ 𝛾 𝑗 } ∪ {(“state”, m), 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 }
   State snapshots are important for two reasons. First, they provide a concrete description of the device’s current
state runtime, from which explanations 𝜖 can be generated. When we later fine-tune a small language model to
explain the device’s state (see Section 3.4), we are essentially training it to describe the current snapshot 𝑠𝑚 in a
manner that satisfies a user’s explanation-oriented command, 𝑐𝜖 . For example, if a user gives the command 𝑐𝜖 =
“how bright is that?” and (brightness, 𝑣 brightness = 50) ∈ 𝑠𝑚 , the device might respond with 𝜖 = “The brightness is
currently set to 50%”. Furthermore, a state snapshot 𝑠𝑚 is nearly interchangeable with a valid action 𝛼 that our
language model should generate in response to an action-oriented user command 𝑐 𝛼 . When we fine-tune it to
generate actions, we are training it to generate a form of snapshot that satisfies 𝑐 𝛼 . The only difference between
an action 𝛼 and a full snapshot 𝑠𝑚 is that 𝛼 omits sensor values. The reason is simple: sensor inputs are, by nature,
immutable. We define a valid 𝛼 that transitions the device from a state 𝑚 to 𝑚 ′ as follows:

                    𝛼 = {(𝑖, 𝑣𝑖 ) | ∀𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ 𝑡𝑚 ∧ 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝜎𝑖 } ∪ {(“state”, m′ ), 𝑚 ′ ∈ 𝑆, 𝑚 ′ is reachable from 𝑚}
   Note that the new state 𝑚 ′ may equal 𝑚, since the device need not transition to a different high-level state in
order to change its settings. When the device generates a proposed action 𝛼 in response to a user command 𝑐 𝛼 ,
we verify that the response adheres to this definition before changing the state of the device. Since we are relying
on a generative model to create 𝛼—and these models are prone to occasional “hallucination” by, e.g., creating
settings and values that do not exist [31]—the proposed action 𝛼 occasionally does not satisfy the definition of 𝛼.
When the device generates an invalid 𝛼, we simply leave the state of the device unchanged.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                            Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models •                                   9


  m∈S            States                                tm ∈ T             Templates                                    sm                Snapshots
         high-level states of a device      modeled      valid ranges for settings and sensors          instantiated        runtime descriptions of device state
                                              by              corresponding to each state                    as

                                                                       setting i range σi
                                                       theat = {                                                       sheat = {
                                                                       (setpoint, [50, 90]),                                            (state, heat),
      m = heat       cool           off                                (room temperature, [50, 90])                                     (setpoint, 70),
                                                                  }                                                                     (room temperature, 65)
                                                                                                                                    }
                                                                       sensor j             range γj


                                                       tcool = {                                                       scool = {
                                                                       (setpoint, [50, 90]),                                            (state, cool),
        heat       m = cool         off                                (room temperature, [50, 90])                                     (setpoint, 68),
                                                              }                                                                         (room temperature, 75)
                                                                                                                                    }


                                                       toff = {                                                        soff = {
                                                                      (room temperature, [50, 90])                                      (state, off),
        heat         cool         m = off
                                                              }                                                                         (room temperature, 75)
                                                                                                                                }




Fig. 5. Overview of device state models, with examples included for a thermostat. We model a device based on a high-level
state machine 𝑆 that describes valid transitions between states 𝑚 (left). A lower-level template 𝑡𝑚 associated with each
state 𝑚 captures each setting 𝑖 and sensor 𝑗 and their valid ranges 𝜎𝑖 , 𝛾 𝑗 (center). At runtime, a snapshot 𝑠𝑚 describes the
current state of the device (right). A thoughtful thing leverages a fine-tuned small language model to act by generating valid
snapshots for new states and to explain by describing the snapshot of the device’s current state.


3.2      Random State Generation
We use a given device’s state model (specifically, the templates 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 ) to create a dataset for fine-tuning a small
generative language model to act upon and explain the device’s state. We begin this process by generating a
large number of randomized state snapshots 𝑠𝑚 from 𝑡𝑚 , with the fields of each 𝑠𝑚 randomly initialized. The
set of random snapshots that we generate needs to be balanced with respect to the relative size of the state
spaces of each 𝑚, as implied by each 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 . This is because we want the model to learn information about
diverse states (i.e., diverse 𝑠𝑚 ), so that it will generalize well. For example, assume a lamp device has two states,
𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 = {on, off }, where 𝑡 on specifies four relevant settings for brightness and RGB color and 𝑡 off specifies no
relevant settings, i.e., 𝑡 off = ∅. Based on these templates, there is only one possible snapshot in the 𝑚 = off state,
i.e., 𝑠 off = {(“state”, m)}. In the 𝑚 = on state, however, there are many combinations of values for the brightness
and RGB settings and, correspondingly, a significantly larger number of possible 𝑠 on . If we generate random
snapshots for 𝑚 = on and 𝑚 = off with equal probability, our model will be biased toward knowledge about the
simple off state while lacking knowledge about, e.g., the diverse colors expressible in the on state. We therefore
generate snapshots from weighted random choice, taking into account the size of the state space implied by the
template for each state. We first make a weighted choice of a state 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 for which to generate a snapshot with
probability 𝑃 (𝑚). 𝑃 (𝑚) is simply a function of the number of settings and sensor inputs present in 𝑡𝑚 :

                                                   |∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑡𝑚 | + |∀𝑗 ∈ 𝑡𝑚 | + 1
                                                      𝑃 (𝑚) =
                                                          |Σ ∩ Γ| + 1
   We add 1 to the numerator and denominator to account for the fact that a 𝑡𝑚 can be empty (e.g., for the lamp
in the off state), but still needs to be chosen with a nonzero probability. After choosing an 𝑚, we then initialize

                                                                                                       , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
10 •    E. King, et al.


   Action Synthesis System Prompt                                 Explanation Synthesis System Prompt
   You interpret JSON descriptions of {device} state and           You interpret JSON descriptions of {device} state and
   provide brief (one sentence) descriptions of that state.        provide explanations about it.

   Describe three situations where someone would want the          First, provide a comprehensive SUMMARY of what you see
   {device} to have those settings. For the situation, include     in the JSON state. Describe it qualitatively, using terms a
   one brief, informal command (related to that situation) that    layperson might understand. Include some information in the
   someone would tell their friend in order to have them change    summary about how the {device} might be interacting with
   the {device} to those settings.                                 the surrounding environment.

   Do not refer to specific settings in the command.               Ask three QUESTIONS that can be answered by the state of
   Format your response as a Python dictionary:                    the {device}. Refer to the valid settings of the {device}, if
   {"situations": [], "commands": []}                              needed. Then, ANSWER the questions. In your answers, use
                                                                   non-technical language that can be easily understood by a
                                                                   layperson.

                                                                   Do not include numbers or specific values from the state in
                                                                   the answer. Refer to things descriptively, not with numbers.

                                                                   Format your response as a Python dictionary:
                                                                   {"summary": "", "questions": [], "answers": []}




Fig. 6. System prompts that we use to synthesize fine-tuning data for small language models. Given a set of state states that
we randomly generate using our state model, we use a large instruction-tuned LLM to generate synthetic “knowledge” about
how different device states relate to different user commands, actions, and explanations.


each value 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑗 in 𝑠𝑚 uniformly at random from the ranges 𝜎𝑖 and 𝛾 𝑗 specified in 𝑡𝑚 . This yields a single
random snapshot. We repeat this process until we have generated a large set of random snapshots. We determine
the appropriate size of this set heuristically, dependent on the size of the state space for a given device. Since the
small language model that we ultimately fine-tune on these states incorporates out-of-domain knowledge, it is
sufficient to generate a set on the order of hundreds or thousands of state snapshots, even when the state space
for, e.g., the thoughtful lamp constitutes billions of possible snapshots.

3.3    Knowledge Synthesis
We label our set of pseudo-random state snapshots with help from an instruction-tuned LLM, allowing us to create
a dataset for fine-tuning a single, smaller generative language model at the action/explanation task for a given
device. In our case, the goal of this process is to capture device-specific “knowledge” that describes how different
user commands 𝑐, actions 𝛼, and explanations 𝜖 relate to one another. We accomplish this by synthesizing a set
of examples of:
   (1) an action-oriented command 𝑐 𝛼 that yields an action 𝛼, derived from each random state snapshot 𝑠𝑚
   (2) an explanation-oriented command 𝑐𝜖 that yields an explanation 𝜖 of each random snapshot 𝑠𝑚
   In the case of (1), the output of the synthesis process is a large set of tuples of (𝑐 𝛼 , 𝛼), where 𝛼 contains all of
the mutable settings from a random snapshot 𝑠𝑚 while omitting any immutable sensor values; the output for (2)
is a large set of tuples of (𝑐𝜖 , 𝑠𝑚 , 𝜖). Table 2 provides examples of random snapshots and synthesized 𝑐 𝛼 , 𝑐𝜖 , and 𝜖.
We synthesize instances using two prompts—one for actions, one for explanations—carefully engineered so that
they generalize to different devices (Fig. 6).
   Our action prompt instructs the teacher LLM to imagine a situation where a user may want the device to
have the settings in 𝛼 given the sensor subset of 𝑠𝑚 (if applicable), then create a brief command 𝑐 𝛼 in informal

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                   Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 11


      Snapshot 𝑠𝑚                Action Command 𝑐 𝛼          Explanation Command 𝑐𝜖                  Explanation 𝜖
      {
                                                                   “Why’s it so dark               “It’s dark because
        “state”: “off”               “I’m off to bed.”
                                                                      in here?”                     the lamp is off.”
      }
      {
        “state”: “on”,
        “brightness”: 100,
        “color”:{
                                      “Let there be                “Is that as bright               “Yes, the lamp is
          “r”: 235,
                                    bright red light!”                 as it gets?”               at 100% brightness.”
          “g”: 64,
          “b”: 52
        }
      }
Table 2. Random state snapshots and examples of synthesized commands and explanations for a thoughtful lamp. Given a
large set of random snapshots, we use an instruction-tuned teacher LLM to synthesize action- and explanation-oriented
commands, as well as explanations. These labeled snapshots serve as a training set for fine-tuning a small LLM to take
actions and provide explanations in response to user commands.




language that a user would give to the device in that situation. Though instructing the teacher model to imagine a
situational context is not strictly necessary to synthesize commands, it tends to produce more loosely-constrained
synthetic commands (e.g., “hey lamp, I’m heading out for the day”) than simply instructing to create a command
(which results in, e.g., “turn off the lamp”) [48]. We ensure that the set of synthetic 𝑐 𝛼 are diverse by re-prompting
the model to suggest a different command if the semantic similarity (i.e., cosine similarity between word
embeddings [29, 51]) of the current command and previously-synthesized commands is too high.
   To synthesize explanation annotations, we prompt the teacher model to ask and answer a question for each
high-level field in the 𝑠𝑚 , i.e., to synthesize several 𝑐𝜖 and 𝜖 for each setting and sensor value in 𝑠𝑚 . We include
the state template 𝑡𝑚 in the prompt to ground the teacher’s questions and answers in the actual capabilities of the
device. For example, if 𝑠𝑚 contains (brightness, 42) and the synthesized 𝑐𝜖 is “Is this the maximum brightness?”, the
template field (brightness, [1, 100]) suggests a correct 𝜖 is, e.g., “No, this is under half of the maximum brightness.”
When synthesizing instances for a new device, we simply substitute the name of the device (e.g., “smart light” or
“thermostat”) into the generic action and explanation prompts with no changes to the instructions.

3.4    Bootstrapping
We fine-tune a small language model on our generated snapshots to give it the ability to generate actions 𝛼 or
explanations 𝜖 in response to user commands 𝑐 𝛼 or 𝑐𝜖 . The objective of this “bootstrapping” phase is to teach
the model the prompt formats for action- and explanation-oriented inputs. We individually insert each of the
action tuples (𝑐 𝛼 , 𝛼) and explanation tuples (𝑐𝜖 , 𝑠𝑚 , 𝜖) from our synthesized dataset into the respective prompt
format to create fine-tuning examples (Fig. 7). By fine-tuning a model on these prompt formats, we are effectively
teaching it to complete the input text of the prompt with either an action (i.e., mutable settings) or explanation.
   As is conventional, we perform a train-test split of the fine-tuning examples prior to training. However, we
hold out the test set beyond the bootstrapping phase and the distillation phase (see Section 6). This enables us to
later test the model’s ability to generalize to new commands, beyond simply learning the input-output pairs it
has been fine-tuned on. We evaluate models’ performance in Section 5 on this hold-out test set.

                                                                            , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
12 •    E. King, et al.


  Action-Oriented Prompt

 User: cα
 [SENSORS] {(j, vj) | (j, vj) ∈ sm } [/SENSORS]
                                                                                   User: Hey, can you cool it down a little bit?

 Output: [SETTINGS] α = {(‟state”, m), (i, vi) | (i, vi) ∈ sm } [/SETTINGS]
                                                                                   [SENSORS] {“room_temperature”: 82} [/SENSORS]
                                                                                   Output: [SETTINGS] {“state”: “cool”, “setpoint”: 76} [/SETTINGS]




 Explanation-Oriented Prompt

 User: cє
                                                                         User: Is it going to cool off in here?

 [SENSORS] {(j, vj) | (j, vj) ∈ sm } [/SENSORS]
                                                                         [SENSORS] {“room_temperature”: 82} [/SENSORS]

 [SETTINGS] {(‟state”, m), (i, vi) | (i, vi) ∈ sm } [/SETTINGS]
                                                                         [SETTINGS] {“state”: “cool”, “setpoint”: 76} [/SETTINGS]

 Output: [EXPLANATION] є [/EXPLANATION]
                                                                         Output: [EXPLANATION] Yes, the cooling mode is active and the setpoint is below
                                                                         the room temperature, so it should cool off soon. [/EXPLANATION]



Fig. 7. Prompt formats that we use to fine-tune a small language model for device actions/explanations. Examples show
prompts for a thermostat device, which has both “sensors” and “settings” in its state model. When fine-tuning, we substitute
the full command, state snapshot (split into immutable sensors and mutable settings), and explanation (if applicable) into the
prompt to create training instances. The fine-tuned model learns to complete the prompt with either actions or explanations
(depicted as colored text) depending on the prompt.


3.5    Distillation
After the first pass of fine-tuning, we use an iterative distillation process to better specialize the small model at
the action/explanation task for a device. The goal of this process is to train the language model beyond the point
of simply memorizing the prompt structure, into a better “understanding” of a given device’s capabilities.
   Conventional distillation works by minimizing the loss between a “student” model’s outputs on unlabeled
training data and pseudo-labels from a “teacher” model on the same data [9]. Recent approaches prioritize
synthesis of new training data from the teacher model to further fine-tune the student model, thus “aligning”
the quality of the student’s outputs with those of the teacher [26, 60]. Our approach works in the same spirit as
recent approaches, but provides grounding by incorporating the device’s state model. We use a teacher LLM to
generate progressively more challenging and/or novel action- and explanation-oriented commands to give to the
student, and to synthesize the correct outputs to commands that the student is unable to correctly respond to.
We illustrate the flow chart for this process in Fig. 8 and describe its steps in the following.
   (1) Synthesize query. We prompt the teacher model to synthesize a new command (either action- or
       explanation-oriented) to give to the student model. We include the device’s state model (i.e., the tem-
       plates 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 ) in the prompt to ensure that the command adheres to the actual capabilities of the device.
   (2) Check novelty. If the command is action-oriented, we check its novelty against every command the model
       has been fine-tuned on in the past (including the hold-out test set created during bootstrap fine-tuning). We
       compute the cosine similarity of the word embeddings of the command against every past command and
       consider it novel if this similarity is below a threshold. We do not check the novelty of explanation-oriented
       queries, since the same command may yield different outputs depending on the state of the device.
   (3) Input to student. We input the synthesized command to the student model. If the command is action-
       oriented, we initialize the student to the “off” state before inputting; if the command is explanation-oriented,
       we generate a random snapshot and initialize the device in that state.
   (4) Check logic. We prompt the teacher model with the command, the student response, and the full set
       of templates 𝑇 , instructing it to assign a binary “true” or “false” label depending on whether the student
       response satisfies the user’s request expressed in the command. If the teacher label is “true”, we return
       to (1). If the rate at which the student responds correctly to the teacher commands exceeds 80%, we proceed
       to (7) before stopping distillation.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                            Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 13



                                                                            no      Input to student                                   true
                                                      Is query novel?
   SYNTHESIZE            “Make the room glow
                         with a soft pink light.”      semantic                                                   CHECK LOGIC
     QUERY
                 1
                                                       similarity       2
                                                                            yes                               3                 4     false



                                                                            no
  SYNTHESIZE            The color given was             Adheres to                        fine-tune student
  CORRECTION            purple, not soft pink.         state model?
                 5                                                      6   yes




Fig. 8. We use an iterative distillation process to align the outputs of the small language model in a thoughtful thing (i.e., the
“student” model) with the outputs of a higher-performance “teacher” LLM. Green boxes denote prompts to the teacher model.
This process distills specialized knowledge about a given device’s capabilities into the generative model that a thoughtful
thing uses to act and explain in response to user commands.




   (5) Synthesize correction. If the student responded incorrectly to the teacher’s command, we prompt the
       teacher to synthesize a more appropriate response that the student should have given. We include the
       device’s state model (i.e., templates 𝑡𝑚 ∈ 𝑇 ) in the prompt to reduce the likelihood that the teacher
       synthesizes a response that is not possible given the device’s true capabilities.
   (6) Check adherence to state model. To prevent fine-tuning the student model on hallucinations produced
       by the teacher model, we check that the teacher’s correction adheres to the state model for the device.
   (7) Fine-tune. When the teacher is no longer able to (a) synthesize commands above the novelty threshold
       and (b) consistently produce corrections that adhere to the state model, or (c) we have generated an equal
       number of action- and explanation-oriented corrections meeting a preset “batch size”, we fine-tune the
       student model on the current batch of synthesized corrections.

   After fine-tuning, we repeat the process on the newly distilled version of the student model. We continue until
the teacher model is unable to synthesize new commands that are both of sufficient novelty while respecting the
state model of the device, i.e., when the rate at which corrections do not adhere to the state model exceeds 90%.

3.6    Integration
Once we have completed the two main tasks of (1) designing a device’s state model and (2) fine-tuning a generative
model to handle user commands, we integrate these two pieces into the device’s system implementation. Given an
interface through which to receive commands (e.g., a voice interface) and determine whether a command is action-
or explanation-oriented, we prompt the fine-tuned model with the user command and device state snapshot
(using the appropriate prompt format in Fig. 7). If the command elicits an explanation, we extract the explanation
text from between the [EXPLANATION][/EXPLANATION] tokens in the model’s output; similarly, if the desired
output is an action, we extract the new settings for the device from between the [SETTINGS][/SETTINGS]. In the
former case, we can display the explanation on a user interface, or read it aloud via text-to-speech. In the latter
case, we first attempt to parse the text of the action into a data structure. If parsing fails due to incorrect syntax,
we quietly log an error and leave the state of the device unchanged. If successful, we check that the proposed
action 𝛼 adheres to the definition (Sec. 3.1). If it does not, we quietly log an error without changing the device’s
settings. If so, we call whichever internal APIs are necessary to change the device’s settings to the values implied
by the output action 𝛼.

                                                                                     , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
14 •    E. King, et al.




Fig. 9. Raspberry Pi 5 installed in the base of our thoughtful lamp prototype. Thoughtful things leverage generative language
models for device control and explainability; these models are lightweight enough to run on low-cost commodity hardware.


4     CASE STUDY IMPLEMENTATIONS
We use our framework to build two proof-of-concept implementations—a thoughtful lamp and thoughtful
thermostat. For each device, we fine-tune two different small language models at the reasoning task—Gemma
(2B) [55] and Phi-2 (2.7B) [23]—which we later compare in Section 5. The engineering effort in all cases is limited
to designing a state model for the device, after which the process of synthesizing training data and fine-tuning
the generative language model for responding to user commands is automated by our framework. We implement
both devices using Python bindings for the llama.cpp framework [7, 20], and therefore adopt Python syntax
throughout this section. We run the implementations on a Raspberry Pi 5 (8GB).

4.1    A Thoughtful Lamp
The thoughtful lamp is an interesting case because of the size of its state space: in the on state, the lamp has
1.65 × 109 possible state snapshots, accounting for each combination of RGB value and brightness. The main
task for the lamp’s generative model is to reason about the way that these different brightness and color settings
relate to different user goals and inquiries. Exploring this case allows us to determine how well a small language
model can learn to generalize to the action/explanation task when the size of the dataset we fine-tune it with
covers only a very small subset of possible states.
   State Modeling. Adhering to the definition in Section 4, the thoughtful lamp has two possible high-level states,
with 𝑆 = {off , on}. Both states 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 can transition to one another bidirectionally. The 𝑡 off template contains no
settings 𝜎𝑖 or sensor inputs 𝛾 𝑗 , i.e., 𝑡 off = ∅. The template 𝑡 on defines brightness and color settings, expressed as
RGB values, i.e., 𝑡 on = {𝜎brightness , 𝜎r , 𝜎g , 𝜎b }. We summarize the state model design in Table 3.
   Random State Generation & Knowledge Synthesis. We use our state model to randomly generate 200 states,
then synthesize their corresponding annotations using GPT-4. We generate two annotations per state—one
action-oriented and one explanation-oriented—resulting in 400 total fine-tuning instances.
   Bootstrapping & Distillation. We perform bootstrap fine-tuning on a small language model with our initial
set of synthetic instances. We do this using low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [27], which keeps the requirement for
GPU VRAM below the 16GB provided by the machine instance we perform training on. After bootstrapping
is complete, we merge the LoRA adapter layer into the full model weights and begin distillation. We perform
distillation with GPT-4 as the teacher model. This process takes several hours, during which the student model
receives around 1000 commands that are synthesized by GPT-4. This produces several hundred new training

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                       Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 15


               State 𝑚     Template 𝑡𝑚                                         Example Snapshot 𝑠𝑚
                                                                                      {
                                   {
                                                                                         "state": "on",
                                       "brightness": range(0, 100),
                                                                                         "brightness": 55,
                                       "color": {
                                                                                         "color": {
                                         "r": range(0, 255),
               on         𝑡 on =                                               𝑠 on =      "r": 64,
                                         "g": range(0, 255),
                                                                                           "g": 234,
                                         "b": range(0, 255)
                                                                                           "b": 1
                                       }
                                                                                         }
                                   }
                                                                                      }
                                                                                       {
               off        𝑡 off = {}                                           𝑠 off = "state": "off"
                                                                                       }
Table 3. Summary of state model for the thoughtful lamp (expressed as Python dictionaries). Left: two high-level states
𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 = {on, off }; Center: templates 𝑡𝑚 for each state; Right: examples of snapshots 𝑠𝑚 for each state. The lamp has four
setting values in the on state (brightness and RGB color) and no sensor inputs; in the off state, the lamp has no settings.




Fig. 10. Example interaction with the thoughtful lamp, via command line interface (Pi removed from base for illustration).


instances based on GPT-4’s corrections, which we then fine-tune the student model on. Both models required a
comparable number of corrections during distillation.
  Integration. We embed the Raspberry Pi in the base of the lamp (Fig. 9), which controls a Philips Hue smart
bulb. While a speech-to-text interface is possible using, e.g., a lightweight Whisper model [50], we rely on a
command line interface for simplicity. When the language model generates new actions, we parse them as JSON
before mapping the changes to settings to the appropriate Philips Hue API calls. Explanations output by the
model are simply displayed on the command line. We show an example of several interactions in Fig. 10.

                                                                                , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
16 •    E. King, et al.


       State 𝑚      Template 𝑡𝑚                                                Example Snapshot 𝑠𝑚
                                                                                        {
                               {
                                                                                           "state": "heat",
                                   "room_temperature": range(50, 90),
       heat         𝑡 heat =                                                   𝑠 heat = "room_temperature": 55,
                                   "setpoint": range(50, 90)
                                                                                           "setpoint": 68
                               }
                                                                                        }
                                                                                        {
                               {
                                                                                           "state": "cool",
                                   "room_temperature": range(50, 90),
       cool         𝑡 cool =                                                   𝑠 cool = "room_temperature": 81,
                                   "setpoint": range(50, 90)
                                                                                           "setpoint": 75
                               }
                                                                                        }
                                                                                       {
                               {
                                                                                          "state": "fan",
       fan          𝑡 fan =        "room_temperature": range(50, 90)           𝑠 fan =
                                                                                          "room_temperature": 74
                               }
                                                                                       }
                                                                                       {
                              {
                                                                                          "state": "off",
       off          𝑡 off =        "room_temperature": range(50, 90)           𝑠 off =
                                                                                          "room_temperature": 74
                              }
                                                                                       }
Table 4. Summary of state model for the thoughtful thermostat (expressed as Python dictionaries). Left: four high-level
states 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 = {heat, cool, fan, off }; Center: templates 𝑡𝑚 for each state; Right: examples of snapshots 𝑠𝑚 for each state. The
thermostat has one sensor input (room temperature), which is relevant to every state and appears in every template. In heat
and cool modes, the thermostat has a setpoint setting.



4.2     A Thoughtful Thermostat
The thoughtful thermostat has a smaller state space than the lamp, but incorporates sensor input (i.e., room
temperature) in its state model. We undertake this implementation to determine how well a small language model
can learn to differentiate between mutable and immutable state (i.e., setting and sensor values, respectively).
   State Modeling. The thermostat has four possible states, with 𝑆 = {fan, heat, cool, off }. Each state 𝑚 ∈ 𝑆 can
transition to each other state. In only the heat and cool modes, the thermostat has a 𝜎setpoint setting; the thermostat
has a 𝛾 room_temperature sensor input in every state. We summarize the state model design in Table 4.
   Random State Generation. We randomly generate 200 states, then synthesize their corresponding action/explanation
annotations using GPT-4, resulting in 400 bootstrap fine-tuning instances.
   Bootstrapping & Distillation. As before, we perform bootstrap fine-tuning with our synthetic instances, aided
by LoRA on a 16GB VRAM machine. After bootstrapping, we use GPT-4 as a teacher model for distillation. Unlike
the lamp, the two base models behaved differently from one another during distillation for the thermostat: Phi-2
required one long round before meeting the threshold to end distillation, while Gemma required two short rounds.
Many of the Gemma model’s responses during the first distillation round were erroneous, suggesting that the
model was still learning the prompt format during distillation. The model therefore quickly met the threshold for
corrections to end the first round. Both models received around 500 novel commands from the teacher model
before completing distillation, which is about half that of the lamp.
   We also noted that both models began to learn actions that assigned only a subset of settings available for a
state (e.g., changing the setpoint of the thermostat without changing the mode). While these actions are valid,
this behavior was not anticipated—all of our bootstrap fine-tuning instances contain the full set of settings for

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                  Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 17


each state. We attribute the differences between the distillation of the lamp and thermostat to differences in
prompt structure (the thermostat prompt includes sensors, while the lamp’s does not).
   Integration. We install the Raspberry Pi on the rear of a 7" touchscreen display, which provides a user interface
to the implementation. We input commands via keyboard, though a speech-to-text implementation is also feasible.
When the language model generates actions or explanations in response to a command, we display them on the
screen. We do not connect our implementation to a climate control system—however, the Pi provides general-
purpose input/output (GPIO) pins capable of interfacing with a common 4-wire residential system, making this
extra integration step fairly trivial.

5     EVALUATION
We frame our evaluations of our implementations around the following research questions:
   • RQ1: How well do small language models perform at the device action/explanation task when trained in our
      framework? Performing “well” in this case means that a model gains the ability to generate actions and
      explanations that set and explain a given device’s state and settings with high accuracy.
   • RQ2: Can small language models learn to generalize to the action/explanation task through fine-tuning?
     Training a model on every possible state it could encounter is not feasible. Ideally, we can leverage the
      out-of-domain knowledge present in a language model to generalize to new and unseen states given only a
      small set of training examples.
   • RQ3: What is the practical performance when implemented in a real device? Since our long-term objective is
      to integrate “thoughtfulness” into everyday devices, it is important to understand runtime performance,
      e.g., response latency.
 We investigate these research questions using the procedures described in the following.

5.1    Procedures & Metrics
For each implementation, we use our framework to fine-tune two base models at the action/explanation task:
Gemma (2B) [55] and Phi-2 (2.7B) [23]. We use a hold-out test set of 100 commands (evenly split between action-
oriented and explanation-oriented), created during the bootstrapping phase of fine-tuning (see Section 3.4). We
input each command from our hold-out test set, generating either an action or explanation with the model under
test. For action-oriented commands, we initialize the device’s state model to 𝑚 = off . For explanation-oriented
commands, we initialize the device with a randomly-generated snapshot, with the random seed held constant
between trials so that the set of states explained by each respective model are the same. Toward answering RQ1,
we measure performance along the following metric:
    • Setting-level accuracy. For each generated response, we use GPT-4 to assign a “correct” or “incorrect”
       label, indicating whether or not the response was appropriate given the command (and device state, if
       applicable). For responses with an “incorrect” label, we use GPT-4 to label which of the fields in the device’s
       state snapshot were either (1) incorrectly set (for actions) or (2) incorrectly explained (for explanations). We
       perform this for the initial bootstrapped model and the distilled model, each at two levels of precision—16-bit
       floating point (i.e., fp16) and 8-bit integer (int8) quantization. To strengthen our confidence in GPT-4’s
       labels, we validate them with a human annotation task performed by 3 annotators. For each response
       generated by the fp16 distilled models, annotators provide a binary “correct” or “incorrect” label. Each
       annotation instance shows the command given and the two models’ responses. We instruct the annotator
       to select each output that correctly addresses the command, or “none of the above” if none were correct.
       This produces 600 labels with Krippendorf’s 𝛼 = 0.75, suggesting satisfactory agreement between human
       annotators [24]. We then check agreement between each human annotator and GPT-4, yielding pairwise
       Cohen’s 𝜅 of 0.66, 0.76, and 0.73, respectively, suggesting substantial agreement [36].

                                                                           , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
18 •    E. King, et al.


  Toward answering RQ2, we compare the similarity of the models’ fine-tuning inputs to the models’ generated
outputs on the hold-out test set using the following metrics:
      • Jaccard similarity. Action-oriented commands generate outputs with high syntactic overlap, since they
        must adhere to the device’s state model. We thus measure the portion of output actions that are fully
        identical to those in the training set using Jaccard set similarity. Lower Jaccard similarity suggests that a
        model is generating novel snapshots with setting values not seen in the training set. We exclude off states
        from this metric, since there is only one possible form a snapshot can take for this state.
      • ROUGE score. For explanation-oriented commands, we measure the ROUGE score [41] between the
        synthesized explanations and the explanations output by the model. Lower scores indicate lower similarity.
        In our case, lower is better since it suggests that the model is generating novel explanations.
  Toward answering RQ3, we deploy each distilled model at two levels of quantization (fp16 and int8) on our
Raspberry Pi 5 (8GB). We do not utilize any form of GPU acceleration. We use our set of 100 test commands as
input to collect the following metrics:
      • Tokens per second. We measure the overall speed of responses by dividing the number of tokens in the
        output by the time taken to respond.
      • Response latency by interaction type. We measure the time taken to respond, as a function of the
        command type (action- or explanation-oriented).
      • Memory usage. We measure the fixed amount of (non-GPU) memory usage by each model at runtime.
      • CPU temperature. Intensive operations like LLM inferences produce heat, which results in CPU throttling
        and reduced performance. We evaluate this impact by continuously inputting our test commands over an
        hour span and measuring the change in temperature. We also note whether any CPU throttling occurs
        during this span. During these trials, we place the Raspberry Pi 5 in a case with thermal heat sink padding.

5.2     Results
Models quickly learn correct actions and explanations for small state spaces. Fig. 11 depicts the accuracy
at choosing or explaining the given device’s settings, across model responses. For example, if the accuracy for
“brightness” is 80%, this means that 80% of the model’s responses chose or explained the device’s brightness
correctly. In general, models quickly attain high performance at choosing and/or explaining settings that have
small state spaces, regardless of device or command type. For the lamp, the number of choices for “state” is two (on
or off ); all models achieve over 80% accuracy at either acting appropriately when the correct response is to turn
the light on or off, or correctly explaining the state (e.g., when 𝑐𝜖 = “Is the lamp using electricity?”, generating
𝜖 = “No, the lamp is not using electricity because it is off"). This is also true of the lamp’s brightness, and the
setpoint of the thermostat. As mentioned in Section 4, the thermostat models met the threshold to complete
distillation after about half as many student/teacher iterations as the lamp, meaning the models are trained on an
overall smaller set of instances—these models nonetheless achieve performance comparable to the lamp.
   Distillation improves the quality of actions and explanations for larger state spaces. While models can
quickly achieve high performance for small state spaces, larger state spaces pose more of a challenge. Referring
again to Fig. 11, the performance for “color” is lowest among all models, for all command types. However,
distillation in these cases appears to provide the largest improvement in performance over the bootstrapped models.
This suggests that additional training is most beneficial to models’ performance at the task of choosing/explaining
states like “color” that represent very large decision spaces. We note that Gemma appears at first glance to
struggle with the relatively small state space of the thermostat “state” setting (i.e., on, off, heat, cool, fan), and
improves with distillation. This is not because the state space itself is difficult—rather, the bootstrapped model
produced a large number of invalid outputs since it had not fully learned the prompt structure.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                            Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 19


                                           Lamp                                                 Thermostat
                      Gemma (2B)                      Phi-2 (2.7B)                 Gemma (2B)                 Phi-2 (2.7B)
            1.0                             1.0                            1.0                       1.0                              Bootstrap (fp16)
                                                                                                                                      Distillation (fp16)
      both 0.8                              0.8                            0.8                       0.8                              Bootstrap (int8)
                                                                                                                                      Distillation (int8)
            0.6                             0.6                            0.6                       0.6
                  State Brightness Color          State Brightness Color         State    Setpoint          State     Setpoint
            1.0                             1.0                            1.0                       1.0

     action 0.8                             0.8                            0.8                       0.8

            0.6                             0.6                            0.6                       0.6
                  State Brightness Color          State Brightness Color         State    Setpoint          State     Setpoint
            1.0                             1.0                            1.0                       1.0

explanation 0.8                             0.8                            0.8                       0.8

            0.6                             0.6                            0.6                       0.6
                  State Brightness Color          State Brightness Color         State    Setpoint          State     Setpoint


Fig. 11. Model accuracy at choosing and/or explaining different device settings across responses to 100 test commands. Top:
both command types; middle: action-oriented commands; bottom: explanation-oriented commands. If a bar shows, e.g., 80%
for “brightness”, this means that 80% of responses appropriately chose and/or explained the device’s brightness setting in
response to a user command. In general, small state spaces are learned more quickly, performance in larger state spaces
benefits from more training, and explanations are harder to learn than actions. Error bars depict a 90% confidence interval.



   Models generate novel & valid actions and explanations not seen in the training set. Table 5 depicts
the textual similarity between models’ outputs and their training data at successive phases of training in our
framework. For actions, the Jaccard similarity is zero for all models at the bootstrap phase, meaning none of
the models’ outputs are identical to those in the synthetic training set of actions. This number increases only
slightly after distillation—the models begin to memorize a very small number of states with more fine-tuning.
For explanations, the ROUGE scores decrease with more training—the score for each ROUGE metric is at its
lowest for every model after distillation. This suggests that more training via distillation induces the models to
generate a more diverse set of explanations. In conjunction with the results in Fig. 11, the models’ generated
outputs are not simply novel, but also exhibit a reasonable level of accuracy. With respect to RQ2, models do
not aggressively memorize the synthetic actions and explanations they are fine-tuned on—rather, they learn to
generate novel actions and explanations.
   Latency, memory usage, and temperature in the base case hint at feasibility in practice. Table 6 reports
results for each device, base model, and precision when evaluated on our Raspberry Pi 5. Our implementation
does not fully leverage the hardware capabilities of the Pi (e.g., GPU acceleration), nor do we use memory
locking to ensure that the models are fully allocated in RAM. In general, the quantized models provide greater
responsiveness. The thermostat device generally exhibits lower latency than the lamp since its state structure
requires fewer tokens. When giving each model a continuous stream of commands for an hour, we noted that
the temperature of the Raspberry Pi never reached the 80◦𝐶 threshold for CPU throttling. Temperature tended
to increase by about 5◦𝐶 to 10◦𝐶 over the first 15 minutes before stabilizing. With respect to RQ3, the base
implementation with no platform-specific optimizations has moderate responsiveness and does not suffer from
performance degradation under load.

                                                                                                , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
20   • E. King, et al.


            Device            Base Model           Checkpoint     Jaccard    ROUGE-1    ROUGE-2     ROUGE-L
                                                   bootstrap      0.00       0.28       0.13        0.26
                              Gemma
                                                   distillation   0.01       0.21       0.06        0.19
            Lamp
                                                   bootstrap      0.00       0.35       0.16        0.32
                              Phi-2
                                                   distillation   0.05       0.30       0.12        0.27
                                                   bootstrap      0.00       0.39       0.14        0.34
                              Gemma
                                                   distillation   0.04       0.27       0.09        0.23
            Thermostat
                                                   bootstrap      0.00       0.41       0.14        0.35
                              Phi-2
                                                   distillation   0.04       0.33       0.10        0.28
Table 5. Similarity between models’ generated actions/explanations and the actions/explanations in the training set. All
models are fp16 precision. Jaccard measures similarity between training and output actions; ROUGE scores measure similarity
between training and output explanations. In general, the models do not aggressively memorize the training set—rather, they
learn to generate novel actions and explanations in response to user commands.



                                                                               𝛼 Latency (s)       𝜖 Latency (s)
     Device              Model       Prec.      Mem. (GB)     Tokens/s      Mean Min Max        Mean Min Max
                                     fp16         5.81          0.60        36.51 10.06 73.56   27.52 18.58 48.54
                         Gemma
                                     int8         3.15          1.25        16.94 5.20 34.50    13.50 8.98 23.15
     Lamp
                                     fp16         5.51          0.63        25.11 9.34 33.96    22.49 12.22 33.04
                         Phi-2
                                     int8         3.08          1.13        13.35 5.29 17.96    13.07 5.97 17.73
                                     fp16                       0.80        18.95 13.29 23.51   21.95 13.70 30.39
                         Gemma
                                     int8                       1.51         9.68 6.02 13.24    11.30 7.90 14.68
     Thermostat
                                     fp16                       0.68        20.47 15.42 24.46   26.56 21.47 33.20
                         Phi-2
                                     int8                       1.24        11.65 8.63 13.94    14.43 10.47 18.01
Table 6. Empirical results of runtime testing on a Raspberry Pi 5 using the Python bindings for the llama.cpp framework
(with no GPU acceleration or memlocking). Without memory locking (i.e., storing the full model in memory without paging
any parts to disk), memory usage results reflect a combination of RAM and disk usage. 8-bit quantized models are generally
faster than 16-bit models, with lower memory overhead. Average latency for actions is generally higher for the lamp than
for the thermostat, since the light’s state model requires more tokens. In general, high latency motivates more specialized
implementations that make optimal use of system resources (rather than general-purpose inference frameworks)



6    DISCUSSION
Our framework instills small language models with “self-knowledge” about a device, which enables the models to
generate appropriate actions and explanations in response to user commands. These language models are small
enough to integrate on real devices, with no need for cloud infrastructure. We achieve this without a need for
specialized training data—by simply designing a state model for a device, we are able to automate the rest of the
process. Our effort opens the door for several further avenues of research, which we discuss in the following.
   Mastering massive state spaces. Our results suggest that larger state spaces are harder for a model to learn.
While our general-purpose framework handles the process of adapting a generalist model to action/explanation
for a device, models would likely benefit from additional domain-specific knowledge in the training set. An
important takeaway is that some device states are harder to learn than others. Bearing this in mind when building
a specialized training set, model performance would likely benefit from data that elucidates those broader states.
For the lamp, this would be, e.g., a large set of named RGB colors and unconstrained text describing them [18].

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                         Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 21


Training new base models on high-quality, domain-specific knowledge would likely provide added benefit to
downstream performance [23].
   Improving runtime responsiveness. Our empirical results suggest that practical thoughtful things are within
reach on everyday hardware, but we leave room for improvement with respect to response latency. The first step
toward improving an implementation is to integrate it more closely with the capabilities of the platform—e.g.,
to utilize GPU acceleration and avoid memory paging. We noted during development that responses using
the llama.cpp binaries tended to be about 3x faster than using the open-source Python bindings for llama.cpp,
suggesting that closer integration with the framework would provide performance gains. In a production
implementation, the hardware platform and software implementation of the state model and of generative model
inferences are likely to be tightly coupled, providing higher performance.
   Incorporating temporality of state. Our state model uses snapshots to encode immediate states, and to
describe future states. Given the limitations of small language models, we stop short of incorporating a temporal
dimension to state, where a sequence of device behaviors over time can be explained or proposed as an action.
This extension to our framework would nonetheless benefit user-centricity. Users are often confused by, e.g.,
smart devices that execute learned (or user-programmed but forgotten) automation routines unpredictably [25].
While our model allows for a device to explain its current state relative to possible future states (e.g., the lamp at
50% brightness can be made brighter), it has no knowledge of past decisions or states. The ability to schedule
future states, or to transition through sequences of states would also be beneficial. Interestingly, many of the
“teacher” corrections that we observed for the lamp during distillation involved such plans: GPT-4 would create a
command like “cycle through the colors of the rainbow”, then synthesize JSON suggesting this state sequence.
These corrections, however, do not adhere to our current state model, so they were omitted.

7   CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed thoughtful things: human-centric devices empowered by a combination of formal state
models and generative language models to take action and provide explanations in response to unconstrained user
commands. We described our framework for building thoughtful things, which takes a state model for a given
device and uses it to synthesize data and fine-tune a small generative language model for the action/explanation
task. The models that enable thoughtful things’ reasoning are lightweight enough to run on-device, with no
dependency on the cloud. To demonstrate our framework, we undertook two case study implementations—
a thoughtful lamp and thoughtful thermostat. We evaluated our implementations by performing automated
and human annotation of the quality of models’ responses. Finally, we deployed our implementations on real
hardware (a Raspberry Pi 5) and collected empirical measurements of response latency, memory consumption,
and computational demand over time. Our work opens the door for everyday devices with greater usability and
improved user privacy.

REFERENCES
 [1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt,
     Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
 [2] GE Appliances. 2023. Owner’s Manual, Refrigerator Models 16, 17, 18, 19, 22 (6th ed.). General Electric.
 [3] GE Appliances. 2023. Owner’s Manual, Refrigerator Models PVD, PXD, and GVE (7th ed.). General Electric.
 [4] Boone Ashworth. 2022. The Risk of Relying on a Smart Home Company to Keep The Lights On. Wired (April 2022). https:
     //www.wired.com/story/insteon-shutdown/
 [5] Natã M Barbosa, Zhuohao Zhang, and Yang Wang. 2020. Do Privacy and Security Matter to Everyone? Quantifying and Clustering
     {User-Centric} Considerations About Smart Home Device Adoption. In Sixteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS
     2020). 417–435.
 [6] Tom Bell. 2023. ERG mode explained: what it is, how to use it and when you should turn it off. https://www.bikeradar.com/advice/fitness-
     and-training/erg-mode


                                                                                         , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
22   • E. King, et al.


 [7] Andrei Betlen. 2024. llama-cpp-python. https://github.com/abetlen/llama-cpp-python.
 [8] Stephen Brade, Bryan Wang, Mauricio Sousa, Gregory Lee Newsome, Sageev Oore, and Tovi Grossman. 2024. SynthScribe: Deep
     Multimodal Tools for Synthesizer Sound Retrieval and Exploration. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User
     Interfaces. 51–65.
 [9] Cristian Buciluǎ, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. 2006. Model compression. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD
     international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 535–541.
[10] Daniel Burmeister, Bashar Altakrouri, and Andreas Schrader. 2015. Ambient Reflection: Towards Self-explaining Devices.. In LMIS@
     EICS. 16–20.
[11] Daniel Burmeister, Florian Burmann, and Andreas Schrader. 2017. The smart object description language: modeling interaction
     capabilities for self-reflection. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom
     Workshops). IEEE, 503–508.
[12] Jeffrey Van Camp. 2019. My Jibo Is Dying and It’s Breaking My Heart. Wired (March 2019). https://www.wired.com/story/jibo-is-
     dying-eulogy/
[13] Augusto Ciuffoletti. 2018. Low-cost IoT: A holistic approach. Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks 7, 2 (2018), 19.
[14] Sven Coppers, Davy Vanacken, and Kris Luyten. 2020. FORTNIoT: Intelligible Predictions to Improve User Understanding of Smart Home
     Behavior. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 4, 4, Article 124 (dec 2020), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432225
[15] Aykut Coskun, Gül Kaner, and İdil Bostan. 2018. Is smart home a necessity or a fantasy for the mainstream user? A study on users’
     expectations of smart household appliances. International Journal of Design 12, 1 (2018), 7–20.
[16] Benjamin R Cowan, Nadia Pantidi, David Coyle, Kellie Morrissey, Peter Clarke, Sara Al-Shehri, David Earley, and Natasha Bandeira.
     2017. " What can i help you with?" infrequent users’ experiences of intelligent personal assistants. In Proceedings of the 19th international
     conference on human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services. 1–12.
[17] Anind K Dey. 2009. Explanations in Context-Aware Systems.. In ExaCt. 84–93.
[18] Leatrice Eiseman. 2017. The complete color harmony, pantone edition: expert color information for professional results. Rockport Publishers.
[19] Renato Ferrero, Mohammad Ghazi Vakili, Edoardo Giusto, Mauro Guerrera, and Vincenzo Randazzo. 2019. Ubiquitous fridge with
     natural language interaction. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on RFID Technology and Applications (RFID-TA). IEEE, 404–409.
[20] Georgi Gerganov. 2024. llama.cpp. https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp.
[21] Google. 2024. Beginner’s guide to the Nest thermostat. https://support.google.com/googlenest/answer/9248184
[22] Denis Gudovskiy, Gyuri Han, Takuya Yamaguchi, and Sotaro Tsukizawa. 2019. Smart home appliances: Chat with your fridge. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1912.09589 (2019).
[23] Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero
     Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. 2023. Textbooks are all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644 (2023).
[24] Andrew F Hayes and Klaus Krippendorff. 2007. Answering the call for a standard reliability measure for coding data. Communication
     methods and measures 1, 1 (2007), 77–89.
[25] Weijia He, Jesse Martinez, Roshni Padhi, Lefan Zhang, and Blase Ur. 2019. When smart devices are stupid: negative experiences using
     home smart devices. In 2019 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW). IEEE, 150–155.
[26] Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alexander Ratner, Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and
     Tomas Pfister. 2023. Distilling step-by-step! outperforming larger language models with less training data and smaller model sizes.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02301 (2023).
[27] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank
     adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021).
[28] Ioana Iancu and Bogdan Iancu. 2020. I love it, but it is too complicated. Aging adults’ perspective on mobile technology acceptance.
     ESSACHESS–Journal for Communication Studies 13, 2 (26) (2020), 13–39.
[29] Tom Kenter and Maarten De Rijke. 2015. Short text similarity with word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM international on
     conference on information and knowledge management. 1411–1420.
[30] Evan King, Haoxiang Yu, Sangsu Lee, and Christine Julien. 2023. "Get ready for a party": Exploring smarter smart spaces with help from
     large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14143 (2023).
[31] Evan King, Haoxiang Yu, Sangsu Lee, and Christine Julien. 2024. Sasha: creative goal-oriented reasoning in smart homes with large
     language models. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8, 1 (2024), 1–38.
[32] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large language models are zero-shot
     reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 22199–22213.
[33] Börge Kordts, Bennet Gerlach, and Andreas Schrader. 2021. Towards self-explaining ambient applications. In Proceedings of the 14th
     PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments Conference. 383–390.
[34] Todd Kulesza, Simone Stumpf, Margaret Burnett, Sherry Yang, Irwin Kwan, and Weng-Keen Wong. 2013. Too much, too little, or just
     right? Ways explanations impact end users’ mental models. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on visual languages and human centric computing.
     IEEE, 3–10.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
                                         Thoughtful Things: Building Human-Centric Smart Devices with Small Language Models • 23


[35] Sook-Youn Kwon and Jae-Hyun Lim. 2017. Multi-objective context-adaptive natural lighting system. Energy and Buildings 144 (2017),
     61–73.
[36] J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. biometrics (1977), 159–174.
[37] Amanda Lazar, Christian Koehler, Theresa Jean Tanenbaum, and David H Nguyen. 2015. Why we use and abandon smart devices. In
     Proceedings of the 2015 ACM international joint conference on pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 635–646.
[38] Bojun Li, Piyanuch Hathaipontaluk, and Suhuai Luo. 2009. Intelligent oven in smart home environment. In 2009 international conference
     on research challenges in computer science. IEEE, 247–250.
[39] Wenda Li, Tan Yigitcanlar, Isil Erol, and Aaron Liu. 2021. Motivations, barriers and risks of smart home adoption: From systematic
     literature review to conceptual framework. Energy Research & Social Science 80 (2021), 102211.
[40] Henry Lieberman and José Espinosa. 2006. A goal-oriented interface to consumer electronics using planning and commonsense
     reasoning. In Proceedings of the 11th international conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 226–233.
[41] Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out. 74–81.
[42] Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen. 2016. " Like Having a Really Bad PA" The Gulf between User Expectation and Experience of Conversational
     Agents. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 5286–5297.
[43] Lucian Meinicke, Keiko Ochi, and Yasunari Obuchi. 2020. Multi-level Query Analysis for NLT-based Synthesizer Interface. In 2020
     Nicograph International (NicoInt). IEEE, 62–65.
[44] Pranay Parab. 2024. Google Assistant Is Losing a Bunch of Features. https://lifehacker.com/tech/google-assistant-is-losing-a-bunch-of-
     features Section: Internet.
[45] Sudipta Paul, Lingyu Zhang, Yilin Shen, and Hongxia Jin. 2024. Enabling Device Control Planning Capabilities of Small Language Model.
     In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 12066–12070.
[46] Alisha Pradhan, Amanda Lazar, and Leah Findlater. 2020. Use of intelligent voice assistants by older adults with low technology use.
     ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 4 (2020), 1–27.
[47] Alisha Pradhan, Kanika Mehta, and Leah Findlater. 2018. "Accessibility Came by Accident" Use of Voice-Controlled Intelligent Personal
     Assistants by People with Disabilities. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[48] Ben Prystawski, Michael Li, and Noah Goodman. 2024. Why think step by step? Reasoning emerges from the locality of experience.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[49] Aung Pyae and Tapani N. Joelsson. 2018. Investigating the usability and user experiences of voice user interface: a case of Google
     home smart speaker. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
     Services Adjunct (Barcelona, Spain) (MobileHCI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 127–131. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3236112.3236130
[50] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via
     large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 28492–28518.
[51] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings of the
     2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics. http://arxiv.org/abs/
     1908.10084
[52] Mersedeh Sadeghi, Lars Herbold, Max Unterbusch, and Andreas Vogelsang. 2024. SmartEx: A Framework for Generating User-Centric
     Explanations in Smart Environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13024 (2024).
[53] Jordie Shier. 2021. The synthesizer programming problem: improving the usability of sound synthesizers. Master’s thesis. University of
     Victoria.
[54] Lo’ai Tawalbeh, Fadi Muheidat, Mais Tawalbeh, and Muhannad Quwaider. 2020. IoT Privacy and security: Challenges and solutions.
     Applied Sciences 10, 12 (2020), 4102.
[55] Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mi-
     hir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. 2024. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295
     (2024).
[56] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal
     Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
[57] Pirros Tsiakoulis, Milica Gašic, Matthew Henderson, Joaquin Planells-Lerma, Jorge Prombonas, Blaise Thomson, Kai Yu, Steve Young,
     and Eli Tzirkel. 2012. Statistical methods for building robust spoken dialogue systems in an automobile. Proceedings of the 4th applied
     human factors and ergonomics (2012).
[58] Pooja Upadhyay, Sharon Heung, Shiri Azenkot, and Robin N Brewer. 2023. Studying exploration & long-term use of voice assistants by
     older adults. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–11.
[59] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017.
     Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[60] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2022. Self-instruct:
     Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560 (2022).

                                                                                         , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
24   • E. King, et al.


[61] Henry Weld, Xiaoqi Huang, Siqu Long, Josiah Poon, and Soyeon Caren Han. 2022. A survey of joint intent detection and slot filling
     models in natural language understanding. Comput. Surveys 55, 8 (2022), 1–38.
[62] Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. 2022. A systematic evaluation of large language models of code.
     In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming. 1–10.
[63] Rayoung Yang and Mark W Newman. 2013. Learning from a learning thermostat: lessons for intelligent systems for the home. In
     Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 93–102.
[64] Alexander Yates, Oren Etzioni, and Daniel Weld. 2003. A reliable natural language interface to household appliances. In Proceedings of
     the 8th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces. 189–196.




, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2024.
